Kotlin 2.2.0-RC release details and What's new (#4844)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/whatsnew/whatsnew-eap.md

In Kotlin 2.1.0, we introduced several new language features in preview. 
We're happy to announce that these language features became 
[Stable](components-stability.md#stability-levels-explained) in this release:

* [Guard conditions in `when` with a subject](whatsnew21.md#guard-conditions-in-when-with-a-subject)
* [Non-local `break` and `continue`](whatsnew21.md#non-local-break-and-continue)
* [Multi-dollar interpolation: improved handling of `$` in string literals](whatsnew21.md#multi-dollar-string-interpolation)

[See the full list of Kotlin language design features and proposals](kotlin-language-features-and-proposals.md).

### Preview of context parameters

<primary-label ref="experimental-general"/>

In this release, we introduce the preview of context parameters.
Context parameters allow functions and properties to declare dependencies that are implicitly available in the 
surrounding context.

This feature replaces an older experimental feature called context receivers. To migrate from context receivers to context 
parameters, you can use assisted support in IntelliJ IDEA, as described in 

> this [blog post](https://blog.jetbrains.com/kotlin/2025/04/update-on-context-parameters/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the [blog post](https://blog.jetbrains.com/kotlin/2025/04/update-on-context-parameters/).
```

      // Ambiguity error
  }
}
```

#### Restrictions

Context parameters are in continuous improvement; some of the current restrictions are:

* Constructors cannot declare context parameters
* Properties with context parameters can't have backing fields or initializers
* Properties with context parameters can't use delegation

However, context parameters in Kotlin represent a significant improvement in managing dependencies through simplified dependency injection,
improved DSL design, and scoped operations. For more information, see the feature's [KEEP](https://github.com/Kotlin/KEEP/blob/context-parameters/proposals/context-parameters.md).

#### How to enable context parameters

To enable context parameters in your project, use the following compiler option in the command line:

```Bash
-Xcontext-parameters
```

Or add it to the `compilerOptions {}` block of your Gradle build file:

```kotlin
// build.gradle.kts
kotlin {
    compilerOptions {
        freeCompilerArgs.add("-Xcontext-parameters")
    }
}
```

> Specifying both `-Xcontext-receivers` and `-Xcontext-parameters` compiler options simultaneously leads to an error.
>
{style="warning"}

#### Leave your feedback

> We plan to stabilize and improve this feature in future Kotlin releases.

Reviewer: Just a thought: there are too many "we" in the text about the Language updates.

Author: Great catch. I replaced some.

Here's an example of reading annotations from Kotlin metadata:

```kotlin
@file:OptIn(ExperimentalAnnotationsInMetadata::class)

import kotlin.metadata.ExperimentalAnnotationsInMetadata
import kotlin.metadata.jvm.KotlinClassMetadata

annotation class Label(val value: String)

@Label("Message class")
class Message

fun main() {
    val metadata = Message::class.java.getAnnotation(Metadata::class.java)
    val kmClass = (KotlinClassMetadata.readStrict(metadata) as KotlinClassMetadata.Class).kmClass
    println(kmClass.annotations)
    // [@Label(value = StringValue("Message class"))]
}
```

> If you use the `kotlin-metadata-jvm` library in your projects, we recommend testing and updating your code to support annotations.
> Otherwise, when annotations in metadata become [enabled by default](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-75736) in a future Kotlin version, your projects may produce invalid or incomplete metadata.
>
> If you experience any problems, please report them in our [issue tracker](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-31857).
>
{style="warning"}

## Kotlin/Native

### Per-object memory allocation

<primary-label ref="experimental-opt-in"/>

> Kotlin/Native’s [memory allocator](https://github.com/JetBrains/kotlin/blob/master/kotlin-native/runtime/src/alloc/custom/README.md) can now reserve memory on a per-object basis. In some cases, it may help you avoid strict memory limitations or high memory consumption on the application's startup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kotlin/Native's [memory allocator](https://github.com/JetBrains/kotlin/blob/master/kotlin-native/runtime/src/alloc/custom/README.md) can now reserve memory on a per-object basis. In some cases, it may help you avoid strict memory limitations or high memory consumption on the application's startup.
```

The new feature is designed to replace the `-Xallocator=std` compiler option that enabled the system memory allocator instead of the default one. Now you can disable buffering (paging of allocations) without switching memory allocators.

The feature is currently [Experimental](components-stability.md#stability-levels-explained).
To enable it, set the following option in your `gradle.properties` file:

```none
kotlin.native.binary.pagedAllocator=false
```

Please report any problems to our issue tracker [YouTrack](https://kotl.in/issue).

### LLVM update from 16 to 19

In Kotlin %kotlinEapVersion%, we updated LLVM from version 16 to 19.
The new version includes performance improvements, bug fixes, and security updates.

This update shouldn't affect your code, but if you encounter any issues, please report them to our [issue tracker](http://kotl.in/issue).

## Kotlin/Wasm: wasmJs target separated from js target

> Before, the `wasmJs` target shared the same infrastructure as the `js` target, meaning that both were hosted in the same

Reviewer: The sentence is too big. Can we break it down into smaller parts?

directory (`build/js`) and used the same NPM tasks and configurations.

Now, the `wasmJs` target has its own infrastructure separate from the `js` target. This allows the
Wasm tasks and types to be distinct from the JavaScript ones, enabling independent configuration.

> Additionally, the Wasm-related project files and NPM dependencies are now in a separate directory: `build/wasm`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, the Wasm-related project files and NPM dependencies are now in a separate `build/wasm` directory.
```

New NPM-related tasks have been introduced for Wasm, while existing JavaScript tasks are now dedicated only to JavaScript:

| **Wasm tasks**         | **JavaScript tasks** |
|------------------------|----------------------|
| `kotlinWasmNpmInstall` | `kotlinNpmInstall`   |
| `wasmRootPackageJson`  | `rootPackageJson`    |

Similarly, new Wasm-specific declarations are introduced:

| **Wasm declarations**     | **JavaScript declarations** |
|---------------------------|-----------------------------|
| `WasmNodeJsRootPlugin`    | `NodeJsRootPlugin`          |
| `WasmNodeJsPlugin`        | `NodeJsPlugin`              |
| `WasmYarnPlugin`          | `YarnPlugin`                |
| `WasmNodeJsRootExtension` | `NodeJsRootExtension`       |
| `WasmNodeJsEnvSpec`       | `NodeJsEnvSpec`             |
| `WasmYarnRootEnvSpec`     | `YarnRootEnvSpec`           |

> This change allows you to work with the Wasm target independently of the JavaScript target, simplifying the configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now work with the Wasm target independently of the JavaScript target, which simplifies the configuration.
```

> You don't require additional setup; this change is enabled by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This change is enabled by default and requires no additional configuration.
```

## Kotlin/JS

### Fix for copy() in @JsPlainObject interfaces

> Kotlin/JS has an experimental plugin called `js-plain-objects`, which introduced a `copy()` function for interfaces annotated with `@JsPlainObject`. The `copy()`  function is useful for manipulating objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kotlin/JS has an experimental plugin called `js-plain-objects`, which introduced a `copy()` function for interfaces annotated with `@JsPlainObject`. The `copy()` function is useful for manipulating objects.
```

Reviewer: Why is it useful? Can we say:

You can use the copy() function to manipulate objects.

However, the initial implementation of `copy()` was not compatible with inheritance, and this

> caused issues when a `@JsPlainObject` interface was inherited from other interfaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
caused issues when a `@JsPlainObject` interface was inherited from other interfaces.
```

Please, double-check this one.
We usually say that a class is **inherited**, but the interface is **implemented**.

Author: Checking with SME. I'll leave it pending for when I have an answer.

To avoid limitations on plain objects, the `copy()` function has been moved from the object itself to its companion object:

```kotlin
@JsPlainObject
external interface User {
    val name: String
    val age: Int
}

fun main() {
    val user = User(name = "SomeUser", age = 21)
    // This syntax is not valid anymore
    val copy = user.copy(age = 35)      
    // This is the correct syntax
    val copy = User.copy(user, age = 35)
}
```

> This resolves conflicts in the inheritance hierarchy and eliminates ambiguity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This change resolves conflicts in the inheritance hierarchy and eliminates ambiguity. It is enabled by default starting from Kotlin %kotlinEapVersion%.
```

> This change is enabled by default starting from Kotlin %kotlinEapVersion%.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Support for typealiases in files with @JsModule annotation

Previously, files annotated with `@JsModule` to import declarations from JavaScript modules
were restricted to external declarations only. Meaning, you couldn't declare a `typealias` in such files.

Starting with Kotlin %kotlinEapVersion%, you can declare typealiases inside files marked with `@JsModule`:

```kotlin
@file:JsModule("somepackage")
package somepackage
typealias SomeClass = Any
```

This change reduces an aspect of Kotlin/JS interoperability limitations, and more improvements are planned for future releases.

Support for typealiases in files with `@JsModule` is enabled by default.

## Gradle

Kotlin %kotlinEapVersion% is fully compatible with Gradle 7.6.3 through 8.14. You can also use Gradle versions up to the latest Gradle release. However, be aware that doing so may result in deprecation warnings, and some new Gradle features might not work.

### Support for rich output in console for Kotlin Gradle plugin

> In Kotlin %kotlinEapVersion%, we support color and other rich output in the console during the Gradle build process, making it easier to read and understand the reported diagnostics. Rich output is available in supported terminal emulators for Linux and macOS. We’re working on adding support for Windows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Kotlin %kotlinEapVersion%, we support color and other rich output in the console during the Gradle build process, making it easier to read and understand the reported diagnostics. Rich output is available in supported terminal emulators for Linux and macOS. We're working on adding support for Windows.
```

![Gradle console](gradle-console-rich-output.png){width=600}

> This feature is enabled by default, but if you want to override it, you can use the following Gradle property in your `gradle.properties` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature is enabled by default, but if you want to override it, add the following Gradle property to your `gradle.properties` file:
```

```
org.gradle.console=plain
```

> For more information about this property and its options, see Gradle’s documentation on [Customizing log format](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/command_line_interface.html#sec:command_line_customizing_log_format).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about this property and its options, see Gradle's documentation on [Customizing log format](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/command_line_interface.html#sec:command_line_customizing_log_format).
```
